BOMBE was the name of an electro-mechanical machine, developed during WWII by Alan Turing and Gordon Welchman, whilst working as codebreakers at Bletchley Park. It was used to help breaking the German Enigma codes and was (partly) based on the so-called BOMBA, an earlier machine developed by Polish mathematicians in 1938. From 1943 onwards, an improved version of the 4-sheel BOMBE was built in the US by the US Navy and, separately, by the US Army.

Based on the information presented by the Poles, British mathematician Alan Turing developed a machine that was capable of recovering the key settings even if the Germans would drop the double encryption of the message key at the beginning of each message. The machine was called Bombe (later: Turing-Welchman Bombe) and was built by the British Tabulating Machine Company (BTM) in Letchworth, Hertfordshire (UK) under supervision of Harold (Doc) Keen. 
 
The name was derived from Bomba, a similar machine developed by the Poles shortly before the outbreak of WWII. The Bomba exploited the fact that the same message indicator was sent twice at the start of each message, a major flaw in the German cryptographic procedures. 

Although the concept of the Bomba was known to Bletchley Park, Turing wanted to try a different approach. When the Germans discovered the weakness they gave up the doubly enciphered indicator on 10 May 1940, the day Germany attacked France, redering the Bomba useless.	  	

Turing designed the British Bombe in 1939. Compared to the Polish Bomba, it used a completely different approach. It was based on the assumption that a known (or guessed) plaintext, a so-called crib, is present at a certain position in the message. The Bombes were built by the British Tabulating Company (BTM, later ICL) at Letchworth (UK) under the supervision of Harold 'Doc' Keen. The first machine, called 'Victory', was delivered at Bletchley Park on 18 March 1940. 

The Bombe was further enhanced with the so-called diagonal board, an invention of fellow codebreaker Gordon Welchman, that greatly reduced the number of steps needed for the codebreaking effort. A second Bombe, with Welchman's diagonal board present, was installed on 8 August 1940. It was named 'Agnus Dei', later shortened to 'Agnes' or 'Aggie'. The first machine (Victory) was later modified with a diagonal board as well. 

During the course of the war, over 200 Turing-Welchmand Bombes were built. To avoid the risk of losing them in case of a bomb attack, they were spread between Bletchley Park and its so-called Outstations in Wavendon, Adstock, Gayhurst, Eastcote and Stanmore, where they were operated by WRNS, RAF-technicians and civilian personnel.
 
http://www.cryptomuseum.com/crypto/bombe/